 
1. Problem Statement

    1.1 The problem
        This study aims to investigate LSTM-based neural networks as part of a framework of approaches for predicting dynamics in the microbiota time series data. Understanding these dynamics is crucial for gaining insights into the development and progression of various pathological conditions. In current practice, the Lotka-Volterra equations are well established; however, they represent a somewhat dated technique. This study seeks to provide an initial stepping stone towards the development of a more advanced predictive model.
    1.2 Why has the problem not been solved yet?
        While there have been successful attempts at implementing LSTM-based models for predicting microbial dynamics in the human gut, there remains a considerable degree of variability in the input data and design choices. Therefore, it is essential to test multiple implementations on diverse datasets to thoroughly understand the problem's nuances and the potential of the LSTM-based approach.
    1.3 Why is the problem challenging?
        The problem is notably challenging because it involves predicting a large number of continuous variables over time, represented as a time series. Moreover, the available datasets exhibit substantial variability and are characterized by their small size, noise, and missing data, making robust predictions even more challenging.

2. Research Questions
    The goal of this study is to advance understanding of the performance of LSTM-based neural in prediction/ forecasting of microbiota time series data. The focus is as much on evaluating performance in different circumstances as it is on investigating, as much as possible, the theoretical reasons behind said performance. Furthermore, one of the outcomes of this study will be a robust testbed that can serve as a stable foundation for further studies.

    RQ: What are the defining performance aspects of LSTM-based Neural Networks in predicting the dynamics in microbiota time series data? What are the circumstances that maximize their performance?

3. State of the Art
    3.1 The latest research work on applying a LSTM-based neural network to microbiome prediction is (Baranwal, Clark, Thompson, Sun, Hero, Venturelli, 2022). The researchers have achieved great success, they particularly highlight the ability of LSTM-based models to predict higher-order interactions that are challenging for the legacy methods. In addition, they praise the training times of LSTM models: a low training time allows models to be generated for a particular application. Among the challenges, the researchers cite data pre-processing.
    3.2 Another notable research that applies LSTM-based models is (Chen, Liu, Zhang, Yang, & Wong, 2021). Here the researchers paint a very similar picture: robust performance compared to state of the art and a very significant reduction in training time compared to the state of the art methods.
    3.3 A different approach is used by (LeBlanc & Ma 2022). They base their solution on LDA, a method borrowed from topic modeling. Though the applications are quite far apart, the mathematical representations of microbiome and text documents are actually quite close. Their solution allows the identification of meaningful subcommunities of microorganisms; not unlike how LDA is typically used to identify topics in a large body of text.

4. Methodology
    4.1 The Approach
        This study will be pursued by conducting several experiments in a testbed aimed at revealing knowledge about the performance of LSTM-based neural network for microbiota prediction. While the previously published related studies have established that LSTM-based neural networks have substantial advantages over the established methods, the extent and context of these advantages are not clear. This study aims to broaden the current understanding by revealing specific in-context knowledge about applying LSTM-based neural networks to microbiota trend prediction.
    4.2 Potential experiments
        4.2.1 Model 1: LSTM for sequence-on-sequence prediction. (n_species x n_feature_sequences) as input, one target sequence as target.
        4.2.2 Model 2: LSTM for sequence-on-float prediction. (n_species x n_feature_sequences) as input, one target float of taxa as target. Is is more accurate than sequence on sequence for target taxa? Can an ensemble model be built to outperfom the sequence-on-sequence on all the taxa?
        4.2.3 How does the winner of Model 1 vs. Model 2 fare against data starvation? In my data the vast majority of taxa are represented very sparsely. What is the sparsest represented taxa that could be predicted reliably? How do LSTM-based models predict the rare microbiota patterns?

6. References
    6.1 Baranwal, M., Clark, R. L., Thompson, J., Sun, Z., Hero, A. O., & Venturelli, O. S. (2022). Recurrent neural networks enable design of multifunctional synthetic human gut microbiome dynamics. Elife, 11, e73870.
    6.2 Chen, X., Liu, L., Zhang, W., Yang, J., & Wong, K. C. (2021). Human host status inference from temporal microbiome changes via recurrent neural networks. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 22(6), bbab223.
    6.3 LeBlanc, P., & Ma, L. (2022). Microbiome subcommunity learning with logistic‐tree normal latent Dirichlet allocation. Biometrics.





GS search links
https://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C5&q=human+gut+microbiome+dynamics+neural+networks&btnG=

